“Alberta’s rat free designation means that we have zero tolerance for rats–there is no permanent population,” says Bruce Hamblin, a rat inspector there. “We haven’t allowed them to establish themselves.” Translation: the rat free status does not actually mean that there are no rats in the province, it just means they’ve been given notice. 

The Alberta government officially declared a “War on Rats” in 1950, and has been fighting a protracted battle ever since. The province has a dedicated team of “Rat Patrollers” who are sent out to deal with rodent problems, and just this year a rat hotline was set up for citizens to report potential infestations. The hotline, which is reached by dialing 310-(RATS), is manned seven days a week by Mr. Hamblin, a former Mountie, and his associates.

Integral to the rat free mission is a 373-mile-long “Rat Control Zone” on the eastern border of Alberta with Saskatchewan. The rat patrollers check residences in this zone, which is over 18 miles wide, at least twice a year, along with granaries, feed stacks, and abandoned barns–any place rats can be found.  

After the recent incursion in Medicine Hat, a city in southern Alberta, the Ministry of Agriculture set up the rat hotline in January. The callers are asked to provide a picture of the suspect rodent. Experts in the office identify whether or not it is a problem rat by telltale visual cues, like the ears, tail, feet, or face. 

Then, either the rat patrol is dispatched, or the municipal government’s local pest control officer is notified. The workers don’t only arrive with bags and chemicals; sometimes there are tricks involved, too. For a plan called “Operation Haystack,” the rat patrollers dropped poisoned hay bales around fledging colonies.

As for what constitutes an infestation, Mr. Hamblin laughs. “Generally, anywhere there’s two or more rats is considered an infestation. But we’ve had one that was a whole family–a dad, mom and all the babies.” 

One of the major challenges with the hotline is misidentification. “It’s funny,” says Mr. Hamblin, “most Albertans have never even seen a rat, and that’s a good thing. We mostly have cases of people reporting gophers, or muskrats, who are native to Alberta and not much of a problem.”

The province’s staunch refusal to be overrun by rogue rodents was inspired by one particularly threatening rat, back in 1950. Albertans were afraid of the Norway rat, a remarkably resilient pest that is thought to have spread the bubonic plague throughout Europe. Efficient reproducers, Norway rats have established themselves throughout the world, piggy-backing off of humans, eating garbage, and making nests in the darker corners of homes.

Out of the 300 sightings reported to the rat patrol in a year, Mr. Hamblin admits, “we only get about 16 confirmed rat sightings per year, and about two or three infestations. But 98 percent of the time we get calls, it’s not actually a rat.”

“We even had one lady earlier this year who called to tell us that she had found an extremely large rat in her basement. It turned out to be a small beaver.”

“Because rat invasion is threatening Alberta, we need to be properly organized and know what to do, in order to fight the battle successfully,” read one booklet distributed in 1954. “No person should spare any effort to kill every Norway rat he sees,” it added.

Meanwhile the rats spread quickly, and by the fall of 1951, some 30 rat infestations were found along 180 km of Alberta's eastern border, and by 1952, the rats were active along 270 km of border. Although most infestations were within 10 to 20 km of the border, some rats had penetrated as far as 50 to 60 km inside the state.

In the first year of the rat control program, the highly potent arsenic trioxide was used to kill rats, but in 1953, safer alternatives such as warfarin, an anticoagulant, was introduced. By 1960, the number of rat infestations in Alberta had dropped to below 200 per year. In 1963, Saskatchewan initiated their own rat control program that significantly reduced the number of rats moving into Alberta. In 2002, the province finally recorded its first year with zero rat infestations, and from 2002 to 2007 only two infestations were found. 

In 2014, the pest control program introduced a new telephone number, 310-RATS, which citizens can call to report rat sightings. Hundreds of suspected sightings are reported each year by concerned citizens, but most of these turn out to be muskrats, or gophers, or squirrels, or mice. Confirmed sightings are dealt by a SWAT-like team of pest-control officers armed with shotguns and poison pellets. Alberta is the only jurisdiction in the world to have a dedicated unit whose task is to quickly eradicate any rats who make it across the border.

Aside from responding to emergencies, the pest-control team has to periodically check each and every farm and granary within the rat control zone that stretches from the US border to the northern forests near Cold Lake, Alta. That’s more than 3,100 farms that need to be inspected annually. 

About a dozen rats are found and killed in Alberta every year, according to pest specialist Phil Merrill. Dozens more enter the state riding on the backs of commercial trucks from the U.S. and other provinces, but they almost always die unable to adapt to the different environment.

“We’ve never totally been rat-free but we don’t have a breeding population. We never have,” Phil Merrill asserts.

That’s an impressive achievement, considering the size of the province—Alberta is nearly as big as France. 



There are chew marks on the side of an old wooden granary. Dry oats are strewn everywhere. Holes have been dug under the shed. It's still early fall and yet the grass is matted down, as though it's been covered with snow.

These are the signs of an enemy Phil Merrill has spent decades battling.

"We've got rats," he says, stepping out of his truck, a grey Ford F-150 adorned with Alberta Rat Control on the side. "I can see the trails they've left in the grass. Dang!"

Mr. Merrill, 64, is standing in a field in southwestern Saskatchewan, just two kilometres from the Alberta border. This is the frontline of a war he's been fighting for nearly 40 years as a pest control officer. The expressive Albertan has been the head of the provincial rat patrol for nearly a decade. Alberta has been rat-free – excepting the odd straggler – for the past 65 years; it's the only jurisdiction in the world to have fought rats and won, though colonies continue to thrive just outside the provincial boundary. Mr. Merrill is tasked with keeping them out.

Albertans have a take-no-prisoners attitude towards rats. For decades the province ran advertising telling residents to fear rats and kill them on sight. There's a heavily inspected rat control zone along the Saskatchewan border and pet rats are banned throughout the province. But Alberta's key weapon is the provincial rat patrol, a team of eight pest-control officers armed with shotguns, tasked with inspecting the control zone and spreading 10 tonnes of poison annually. No other jurisdiction has created a dedicated unit with the role of quickly snuffing out any rats who make it across a border.

"Alberta's got a real Alberta Advantage – we don't have rats," Mr. Merrill said between gulps of chocolate milk, his favourite drink, while driving the 500-kilometre control zone that falls under his purview. "There's a cost to rats. A farmer with a wooden bin would have to pay $1,500 for a new floor each time they chew through. The problem isn't that they eat that much wheat, but they contaminate a lot."

Despite attempts, no one has been able to estimate how much Alberta has saved from having no rats. If they got through, the rodents would destroy stores of grains on farms, undermining a pillar of the provincial economy. They also carry disease and would chew through household pipes and wires in Edmonton and Calgary. After more than a half-century without rats, the savings have been in the millions of dollars, according to Mr. Merrill.

Raised in southern Alberta, Mr. Merrill studied pest management at Simon Fraser University. He has worked as an inspector and pest specialist in Alberta for most of his life, and rats are clearly a passion. It's an odd job, but one that has yielded many stories. There was the rat that got loose on an Air Canada flight to Fort McMurray and somehow made it to the cockpit; a stubborn rat in a Lethbridge supermarket that was chased by employees carrying brooms; or the pet store that chose to fly three rats to the SPCA in Vancouver rather than euthanize them.

Alberta's war on rats started in 1950 when the rodents were first found in the border hamlet of Alsask, Sask. With the Rockies to the west, badlands to the south and vast forests to the north, Alberta had never had rats. But after two centuries of slow progress west from the port cities of the East Coast, rats had finally arrived at Alberta's doorstep. With a post-Second World War government that wielded significant resources, understood agriculture and feared the damage that rats could do to crops and buildings, the Alberta government created the rat patrol.

The Social Credit government of the day also established a rat control zone that stretches 29 kilometres into Alberta along the Saskatchewan border. The control zone starts at the U.S. border and continues to the northern forests near Cold Lake, Alta. There are about 3,170 farm sites within the zone and each is inspected annually. Special attention is lavished on older granaries with wooden floors.

The rat patrol's main weapon is a bucket of aquamarine poison pellets. The bait is made of grain, barley and poison, all held together by wax. "Poison just works the best, by far," Mr. Merrill says as he pulls a bucket of the anti-coagulant pellets from the back of his truck. They'll kill most rats within a few days. The patrol has mostly phased out the use of snap traps.

Some in Alberta question whether the province is truly rat-free. Mr. Merrill explains that what the status means is that the province has no breeding rat population. Hundreds of rats do come into Alberta on commercial trucks from the U.S. and other provinces, but they're almost always alone and die alone.

The wooden granary in Alsask that is the source of Mr. Merrill's frustration is outside of his jurisdiction. The neighbouring Alberta town of Oyen has been a recent hotspot for rat activity and he thinks the old structure is where the rats are coming from.

A paper sign stapled onto the granary says that a pest control officer working for the local county last visited in May. Mr. Merrill shakes his head. "That just ain't enough. They need to be here every week. And they probably need to empty that granary."

The granary looks like a backyard shed and was probably built in the 1970s. The oats inside have been left alone for five years and there are probably hundreds of rats living under the granary. Surrounded by kilometres of empty, wind-swept prairie, the rats have found a warm place to live with a nearly unlimited supply of food.

"Damnit, I thought they'd all be dead," said Mr. Merrill, noting that officials in Saskatchewan have flagged the granary. "We've got to do something about this or they'll keep getting across that border."

If the granary were only a few kilometres to the west in Alberta, Mr. Merrill would have the shed emptied and lifted by a crane. Armed with poison and shotguns, the rat patrol would have the rodent situation solved quickly. If that didn't work, they would set fire to the granary.

Saskatchewan doesn't have a rat patrol, but the province has stepped up its rat control effort in recent years. Two-thirds of its regional municipalities are now rat-free and the province could be entirely rat-free within a decade.

"That's where the rats stop and the patrol starts," says Romeo Prescott, a farmer in Alsask, pointing at a nearby cell tower on the Alberta border. "Growing up we knew that Alberta was militant about rats. We figured we had so many here because they'd send them back to Saskatchewan. It would be great if our province would be as aggressive as Alberta. My rat patrol on this farm is my cats."

During 1953 to 1959, the rat control program evolved into its current structure. Pest control inspectors were appointed by municipalities, and control was administered and supervised by local governments with co-ordination and support by the provincial government.

The southward spread of rats was halted in 1953 when they reached the relatively uninhabited Cypress Hills. Rats continued to spread north until 1958 when they were stopped by the uninhabited and unbroken boreal forest near Cold Lake.

Then, as today, the seven rural municipalities bordering Saskatchewan carried the major responsibility for rat control. Funding, however, was in dispute; these municipalities argued that they were spending funds to protect the entire province from rats. Thus in 1954, Alberta Agriculture agreed to pay 50 per cent of the salary and expenses of a full-time pest control inspector for each rural municipality along the eastern border.

These pest control inspectors performed key tasks:

    checked every premise within the first three ranges (29 km) west of the border (Figure 2)
    distributed bait and established bait stations
    encouraged rat-proofing of buildings and the removal of rat harborage and food
    destroyed any rat infestations that were found

Figure 2. Rat control zone in eastern Alberta.

Rat bait was supplied free of charge to all municipalities that had appointed a pest control inspector. Warfarin, the first anticoagulant rodent poison, was available in 1953.

Warfarin was developed in Wisconsin, where finely-ground corn was the recommended bait substrate. However, corn was not normally available to rats in Alberta, and bait acceptance was poor.

A series of field trials during 1953 to 1955 showed that coarsely-rolled oats gave satisfactory results, and this bait substrate is still used in Alberta today. The amount of bait used in the control program increased annually until about 1958 and then levelled off with the yearly requirements varying between 5,000 and 13,000 kg of dry warfarin bait and between 660 and 4,750 litres of water-soluble warfarin.

Public education and information continued. Posters and brochures on rat control were widely distributed; displays were presented at local fairs, picnics and rodeos; and talks were presented to schools, 4-H clubs, agricultural societies, Chambers of Commerce and to just about anyone who would listen. "Call of the Land," an Alberta Agriculture agricultural news program began broadcasting in 1953 and was used to disseminate information on rat control.

Although there was some initial resistance, public interest and support for rat control was favorable, particularly from people who had rats. As an example, 7 meetings were attended by almost 900 people in the Medicine Hat area during February 1956.

Working with First Nations and Métis communities in north-central Alberta also presented some specific challenges at the time. The rats were unwanted, but some residents were concerned about potential dangers to children, pets and livestock from poison baits. Because of the association of baits with the dangers of strychnine, warfarin baits were removed or destroyed.

At a series of meetings with members of Indigenous communities, an Alberta Agriculture staff member ate warfarin-treated rolled oats while discussing rat control and the physiological effects of warfarin. He was able to effectively demonstrate the relative safety of warfarin to concerned community members, and they were able to move forward together.

The Agricultural Pests Act made rat control mandatory. Property holders who failed to control rats and disregarded repeated encouragement and warnings from pest control inspectors could be served with an official warning. Failure to comply with the terms of the warning could result in a court action.

However, legal recourse was not used for several years until the public was educated in rat control. The first court case did not occur until 1955. In 1956, some 17 notices to control were issued and 3 court actions and convictions resulted. At that time, court cases were heard by a local magistrate who was usually a locally prominent citizen, often a merchant or postmaster. Therefore, rat control was enforced as well as supervised at the local level.

The court actions apparently had the desired effect, for no more than seven notices to control rats have been issued in any year since 1956.

The City of Lloydminster presented a special problem in rat control because the municipality straddles the Alberta-Saskatchewan border. Obviously, rat control in Lloydminster, Alberta, would have been difficult if there were no control in the Saskatchewan portion of the city. This dilemma was resolved by orders in council by the governments of Alberta and Saskatchewan that declared that the Agricultural Pests Act of Alberta applied to Lloydminister, Saskatchewan.

The number of known rat infestations in the border area increased rapidly from one in 1950 to 573 in 1955, and the numbers varied between 394 and 637 during 1956 to 1959. After 1959, the numbers of infestations dropped dramatically (Figure 3). Hence, almost 10 years passed before an accumulation of training, experience and public education brought the rat problem firmly in hand.

Rat control in Alberta has not changed markedly since 1960. The bulk of control is conducted by pest control inspectors hired and supervised by rural municipalities along the Alberta-Saskatchewan border.

The provincial government's share of funding was increased to 60 per cent in 1971, to 75 per cent in 1973, and to 100 per cent in 1975. All premises within the 29 x 600 km control zone from Montana to Cold Lake are inspected at least annually (Figure 2).

The number of premises inspected annually varies between 2,000 and 4,000. Rat infestations are eliminated by bait, gas or traps. Buildings are occasionally moved or torn down, and in some cases, rats are dug out with a backhoe or bulldozer.

Farmers within the control zone are encouraged to eliminate rat food sources and harborages as well as to maintain permanent bait stations. Rats within bale stacks of hay and straw are a continual problem, so farmers are encouraged to place bait within the lower one or two layers of bales when the stacks are built. Pits are dug for municipal garbage disposal sites so that garbage can be buried or burned, and sites are fenced to channel garbage into the pits.

Saskatchewan initiated a rat control program in 1963, which may have reduced the number of rats moving into Alberta. Over the years, meetings have been held with personnel from Saskatchewan to share information and discuss common problems. Some municipal employees from Alberta also work on rat control in Saskatchewan to reduce rat migration into Alberta.

Newer anticoagulants have been used, but warfarin is the standard poison. Warfarin on coarsely-rolled oats with 5 per cent icing sugar is distributed in 454-gram plastic bags. Colored confetti was added to the rolled oats as a safety precaution in 1965. Warfarin water baits are also effective, particularly in the semi-arid prairie and on premises (e.g. grain elevators) where food is plentiful.

After 1959, the number of infestations dropped dramatically; numbers vary between 36 and 216 per year (Figure 3). Surprisingly, overland transportation of rats has not been a major problem, with no more than eight infestations reported in any one year. Most infestations within the interior of Alberta consist of a single rat transported by truck or rail.

A few white rats have been brought in by pet stores, biology teachers and well meaning individuals who did not know it was unlawful to have rats in Alberta. The white rat or laboratory rat is a domesticated Norway rat. If white rats escaped captivity or were turned loose, they could multiply and spread throughout Alberta just like the wild Norway rat.

Consequently, white rats can only be kept by zoos, universities and colleges as well as recognized research institutions in Alberta. Private citizens may not keep white rats, hooded rats or any of the strains of domesticated Norway rats.

Perhaps the greatest "problem" is that most residents of Alberta still cannot identify rats and rat signs. In the fall of 2014, a new telephone number, 310-RATS, was initiated to provide an easy to remember number to encourage citizens to report rat sightings.

Hundreds of suspected infestations are reported each year by concerned citizens, but most sightings turn out to be muskrats, pocket gophers, ground squirrels, bushy-tailed wood rats or mice. However, all suspected infestations are investigated either by local or provincial field staff. As previously mentioned, confirmed infestations are eradicated as soon as possible.

The public information and education effort might best be described as a maintenance program. Within the control zone, residents know how to identify and control rats. Periodic inspections serve as a reminder that the rat control program is active and necessary. Within the interior of Alberta, most residents know that Alberta is rat-free and there is a program to keep it that way.

Most public education is directed toward identification of rats and rat signs. The discovery of a rat in Edmonton or Calgary receives full media coverage. In addition, the success of the program is reported by provincial or national media three or four times a year, and this success serves as a reminder to the residents that rat control is still an important program in Alberta.

After many years, rat control has become routine and is a source of pride to the citizens of Alberta. However, the problem is not solved; personnel involved in rat control must continually guard against complacency. Rats have the capability to spread throughout Alberta just as easily today as they could in the past.

